Research conducted by many consulting companies shows that most business owners and company managers do not assess the market forecast well enough and incorrectly form a sales forecast and sales plan.
What does this lead to? Unfortunately, it does not lead to the fact that we make forecasts more than necessary and make them unrealistic.
Most often, this is an underestimation of the market growth, because today the Russian market is growing very actively, and given how the European market and the American market are developing, the dynamics of this growth will continue for several more years.
What happens when we underestimate our market, our sales volume? Of course, this affects our profits, our turnover. As a result, we do not get our profits, we do not get our turnover and lag behind our competitors.
That is why the topic of sales planning is the most relevant for any company, whether it is a large or medium-sized company, or a business that is just starting. Sales planning is, of course, a key factor that will allow you to achieve success in the market.
We will consider the main sections of sales planning and sales planning. What will we consider? First, what does this forecast give us? What will we get as a result? The second point that we will consider is organizational methods. Who participates in forecasting? How often should this be done?
The next point that we will consider is the main steps of planning, the main algorithm that we will go through in order and consider on examples. In conclusion, we will see how often we need to make forecasts, how often we need to control them, with what frequency and who should be responsible for this.
And, of course, what we will get as a result if we follow this algorithm and forecast sales in the way we suggest you do it according to our algorithm.
Let's look at what forecasts were given at different times by different famous people, including the heads of large corporations and large companies. We see that forecasts often do not come true.
This gives us a reason to doubt the effectiveness of this work and say that we will not predict, it did not give us the result, it will not give us the next one. We go blindly through the market, not receiving our income and our turnover.
Let's turn to famous people and look at the forecasts that did not come true. Lord Kelvin said in 1895 that it was impossible to create an aircraft heavier than air. As a result, we see how well the aviation and space industry is developing. Yes, his forecast did not come true, but it does not mean that it was not necessary to predict and look at the future.
A person will never be able to cut off nuclear energy. What do we see today? Today we see that the largest world powers are taking a course to activate the work on nuclear energy, because it is an inexhaustible energy resource and gives us the opportunity to develop further, regardless of whether there are any reserves in the depths of the earth or they are running out.
Who may need a computer at home? The member of the board of directors of DEC doubted. What do we see today? Probably, most, maybe not even one computer, because we need it not only for work, but also for communication, entertainment, and, in fact, his forecast, as well as the forecasts of other famous people, also did not come true.
Even Steve Jobs, the CEO and member of the board of directors of Apple, doubted the need for an Internet system. Today we see billions of users who are multiplying day by day. And this is not just a resource that allows us to find information, to look at something, to find something. This is a resource that allows us to work.
What benefits do we have from what we start to predict? The first is, of course, a more accurate determination of our resources. Resources are not limitless in the company, this is clear. As for technological resources, technical, personnel, and, of course, financial, it is impossible to plan the life of any company without this, otherwise we simply do not know what we will come to at the end of the planned period.
And just forecasting gives us the opportunity to see what resources will be needed, in what period it will be necessary, and gives the opportunity to solve the question of how to provide our company with these resources.
The next point, which is very relevant today, is, of course, the release of new products. The release of new products gives the opportunity to compete in the market, since today many products by quality characteristics simply do not differ from each other. Just planning new products gives the opportunity for the company to look into the future, not only for a planned period, not only for a year ahead, but also for 3-5 years further.
The next point, which is very important for the company, is the reduction of warehouse costs. Logistics began to be conceived not so long ago, although it is a very effective tool for reducing costs for the company. Statistics have been submitted that when the costs in the logistics sector are reduced by 1%, we increase our profits by 2%. Of course, this is an average statistic, and maybe it is not relevant for each company.
But try to calculate how much you can save if you just optimize warehouse supplies, warehouse costs, transport costs, and so on. Planning also helps you do this.
The next point, which is very relevant, is, of course, the possibility of working with suppliers, the possibility of a preliminary order, the possibility of discussing in an agreement or at a meeting the minimum or maximum supplies that you need to organize the continuous work of your company.
There are two more points that also benefit you from forecasting. The first is, of course, that you can take into account the most strongly influencing factors for the work of your company. If you do not make a forecast, you cannot assess what more and what less has such an impact.
If you find adverse factors, you have the opportunity to react to them and develop a plan of action that will help reduce the pressure of these negative factors on the activity of your company.
The next point, which is very important, is the possibility of creating a motivation system for employees who will understand. This is not just a sales plan taken from the ceiling, but a plan that the company has built, which understands what it wants to achieve in the market and how it will do it.
By giving people tools, creating a motivation system, you will naturally achieve the plan that you have created. It is the motivation system that gives such a lever and such a tool and helps to preserve the personnel resource, which is no less important today than all the others.
The next important organizational point is who should be engaged in forecasting. We have a lot of employees in our company, a lot of departments that have to do with the budget, which means the development of sales forecasts.
Nevertheless, some of them are key employees who simply have to participate in this process. There are other employees who also have to do with the budget, but do not make and do not develop sales forecasts.
Let's take a closer look at who should do it. The first point is the sales manager or sales director or sales manager who is in your company.
This is the person who is responsible for the implementation of the product. Naturally, this is his direct duty, but not only on his shoulders this burden should be lifted. Who else should participate? Of course, the company manager. Why the manager?
Because he sets the bar, this is his business and his money, and he must understand when he will receive a return, what kind of return he will receive and what will happen as a result over a certain period.
Another important department or unit, or maybe you just have employees who work in the company without a separate department, is, of course, the marketing department. What can they give for sales forecasting?
Of course, external information, market analysis, analysis of the activities of competitors and understanding of how we can be represented in this market, what are our strengths and weaknesses, what are we better at and what are we worse at, what product is presented by our competitors at what prices and how our assortment differs from that presented on the market.
All this information is collected by marketers systematically, constantly and provided at the moment when it is necessary to create a sales forecast, thus participating in planning directly.
Well, who does not have a direct relationship with sales forecasting? Probably, these are all services that are important for the company, but for sales forecasting they can be consultants, but not direct executives.
Of course, this is a director on staff. He does not participate in sales forecasting because he does not know the clients, he does not know the market and the situation on it so well. How can he participate in the sales forecast?
Sales forecasting is not a way, but at the time of budgetary composition it will be necessary to determine how many employees are needed for the implementation of the household strategy. And what employees are needed to, for example, ensure the volume of sales that is planned?
For example, you go to a new market segment and you do not have specialists who could actively work in this segment, and most importantly, professionally. The task of the director on staff or the head of the staff service is to ensure the data of employees. Of course, he will participate in this.
The next point I would like to talk about is two more key figures in the company. First, the number of employees. The number of employees is a very important factor in the development of the company.
The next point I would like to talk about is two more key figures in the company. The director on production and the director on finance. The director on production is also the acceptance side. He accepts the plan that was drawn up and calculates how production can work to ensure the required amount of production.
The director on finance is responsible for the budget calculation. It is he who receives all the data to understand what resources are needed by the company to implement the plan.
Let's see how to make a plan. The plan can be divided into different sections. You can choose what is convenient for you in planning and in control. What sections can be divided?
We look at the long-term plan, the short-term plan, or the medium-term plan. The short-term plan is most often developed for a year or less, the medium-term plan is up to three years, and the long-term plan is 5-10 years. Of course, the 50-year plan is not yet relevant to us, but nevertheless, the company that plans its activities for so long is more stable.
As for the product, that is, the assortment, if your company does not have one product or one type of product, but a very large assortment, then, of course, you need to make a plan in the section of your assortment groups.
The only thing is that if you have 3,500 or 5,000 names, then there is absolutely no need to do each name separately. Divide your assortment into groups, enlarge it so that it can be predicted, so that it can be planned, otherwise the tables or plans will be simply unrealistic to look at and analyze, and, accordingly, the percentage of errors will increase.
The next point is how to make a plan. This is for clients. The client base can be different. These can be key clients, new clients, or potential clients. You can break the data of clients and make a sales plan to understand.
Key clients are those who provide the main turnover, and the forecast will be more realistic for them. New clients are a question, because we calculate the sales plan for them, but whether it will take place or not, the probability that such a plan will be implemented will not be as high as for key clients.
Therefore, many companies, in the category of clients, plan their sales in the same way.
How else can you divide? You can also divide it according to the employees of the company. If you have different departments, which are divided according to sales channels, and this is an wholesale channel or a retail channel, maybe you have divided clients by industries, or maybe you have allocated separate corporate clients. This is how you can predict your sales.
I want to consider the main sources of information, because without them, of course, we will not make a forecast. These are basic information, on the basis of which we will have to draw conclusions, analyze it and make management decisions. Therefore, we will see what sources we need to make a forecast.
The first thing we will consider is external sources of information. Many employees of companies work with external sources of information. These are marketers, managers, merchants. These are people who directly remove information from the market. External sources of information are divided into two parts. These are secondary and primary information.
We will consider the features of this type of information. First of all, we analyze and collect secondary information. Why? This is the most optimal at a price and time. Therefore, first we take what is on the surface.
And today there is a lot of information on the surface. The main thing is to collect it competently, to sow what is not necessary and to analyze it. What are the main sources? The first is, of course, the data of the state statistics. Formerly, the State Committee of the Communist Party of Russia, now the Russian Communist Party.
I want to say that this is the largest and longest-running consulting company that removes information. It started in the Soviet times. Their methodology is well developed. The only problem is that they collect information on the company's reputation.
Given the optimization of taxation, the data is not quite real. I want to provide you with such average information on statistics. If you take information about the volumes of a region or the volumes of sales of a company in the state or Russian states, you can add about 35-40%. This is the delta that gives you an understanding of the real volume of the market.
I want to say that the information in the Russian state is constantly updated. Moreover, it can be used in open access on their website, in the Internet system. You can go and see in interactive mode what figures are given in different regions, in different industries, and so on.
This is a very good source of information that is constantly available. This information works very well in relative expression. For example, one region or one industry has almost no errors, because the situation is almost the same everywhere.
What else is interesting? This is the growth of customs information. These are the customs statistics that allow you to understand how much product has been imported, at what prices, in what assortment. It is clear that these are not sales data.
But if a company imports a product, it plans to sell it anyway. Of course, some remnants remain, and there is an error. The error of information in the growth of customs information is 15-17%. This is slightly less than in the Russian state.
This is due to the fact that information is collected in more detail, and more and more various obstacles are created for the raw import. Therefore, there is certainly less error. If you are associated with a product that is imported, I highly recommend you use this source.
You can easily find your product or a similar one that gives you information.
The only thing is that sometimes there are purchased articles, and this must be taken into account. Therefore, always compare the information. If it has a very large error in different sources, then you need to use it very carefully.
The next is the Internet system. There are many search opportunities. The main thing is to ask the right search words. Now there is also an opportunity to explore blogs if your product is related to the end-users market.
Then you can read the personal diaries of users of the Internet system and see how they relate to your product, what they say, what they think, what they offer. In fact, in some companies, there are already specialists like blog analysts. This gives information and optimization of costs for conducting various research. Therefore, I highly recommend it.
The next point to consider is the companies that conduct research. In fact, there are many websites in the Internet system where ready-made research is presented. Naturally, you can use them. The only recommendation is to ask them to send you at least one chapter to see what is there.
Let it be without numbers, but you will understand at least the structure of the research. If you don't do this, then you risk getting caught up in the fact that all the secondary sources of information were sent to you and you were given this for ready research. Such things happen. And companies that sell ready research do not always perform them themselves.
Therefore, look who did it, how high-quality it was done, whether they used it or not. And this is also an option for optimizing costs for collecting information on the market. Because someone has already paid for it, you are sold. This is cheaper, of course, in accordance with the company that was the customer. Therefore, this is a very good tool for finding information.
I want to say that on some websites such research is even free. They do it as their advertising. Maybe they give limited information, not all that you need. Nevertheless, in one research you will take one part of the information, in another, another. As a result, you will get a complete systematic research.
The next point I would like to mention is that there are various magazines that may not be related to your industry. For example, the magazine Expert or the company Secretfirma or Smartmoney. And many others. I want to say that they very often publish information, articles about the development of a particular industry. They talk about leaders, their turnover, their development directions.
The company's managers themselves give interviews where they talk about what they plan to do. And this is just as valuable a source of information that will give you the opportunity to assess the situation on the market. I highly recommend using it, because the analysts who work there are quite competent people.
I have encountered such things several times. We checked the figures. The figures were almost 95%. Therefore, you can safely use it. At least I have not encountered such articles. I think such a source will help you a lot.
Well, we have collected secondary information. It took us a maximum of two weeks. We collected it, looked at what we had and realized that some information was missing. In order to clearly and correctly understand the situation on the market and use it in the future for forecasting.
What can we do? Of course, we can use primary sources of information. The primary sources are different because it is always a conversation between someone and someone. We take information personally from someone. This is a more expensive thing, of course. It takes more time. Therefore, the company must be very well prepared to use such primary sources of information.
What do I mean by this? The first is a deep interview. A deep interview with the companies' intermediaries, managers, commercial directors, potential clients. In fact, this is often done by the sales managers themselves, development managers, commercial directors. They do it just during a meeting, in a conversation, at an exhibition, etc.
The most important thing is to take this information in time and systematize it, otherwise it will not work for the benefit of the companies. Such interviews are very useful. The main thing here is to think through the list of questions you want to ask. There should not be too many of them.
An interview should take an average of 30-40 minutes so that it is not tiring and takes place in the form of a conversation. But such a form of conversation allows you to take a lot of additional information, not just numbers, but some qualitative information. What do clients want? What do they need to do additionally? What do they like? What do they not like? What is the assortment of preferences? And so on.
This helps to understand how the client wants to develop. We will talk about this in order to plan our sales.
The next point is a deep interview with experts, with industry experts. Who is related to them? The same market participants who have been working on it for a long time. You need to approach the experts very carefully.
The next point is a survey. The survey is often conducted to determine the quality of the sales. The survey is conducted to determine the quality of the sales.
The next point is a survey. The survey is often conducted to determine the quality of the sales. The survey is often conducted to determine the quality of the sales.
This is an expensive method, because it requires a large selection for the survey. And, of course, you need a balanced decision to understand whether you need this survey or not. Because not in every case, but in about 10-15%, you have to resort to this method.
The next point is an observation. This is the simplest point, because our employees observe the sales process, the negotiation process, and so on. Any observation allows us to understand why the buyer chooses our product.
What else do we have from the primary sources of information? These are experiments. For example, we want to change the price. And by increasing the price, we increase our turnover. Then we need to understand how our buyer will react to our price.
Naturally, we can conduct an experiment in a specific region, or in a specific company, or in a store. And thus understand how the reaction is going on. Is our turnover decreasing or remaining stable? And based on this, make some management decision.
What else? The focus group is a very good tool, but you need to be careful with it, because not all focus groups provide the necessary information. What should you pay attention to when holding a focus group?
The first thing to pay attention to is the number of participants. 10-15 participants are selected, and the moderator or the host, usually a psychologist, conducts a forced conversation. She records it on camera and then analyzes it.
The first thing you need to do is to make sure that the people who come to the focus group are really consumers of your product. It often doesn't happen. The second thing is that those who come to the focus group should not know the brand of the product or the brand of the product whose company is being discussed. Otherwise, the whole effect will be erased and you will not get the results you want.
There are several focus groups, and I have one recommendation. The focus group is not a cheap event. If you have a staff psychologist or a staff member with a psychological education, you can teach him and conduct a focus group inside the company.
We are all consumers of our product, which we offer to the market or sell, so the focus group will help you find out what you need. It can be held in the form of an informal meeting or in the form of communication to find out all the problems, voice them and think about what to do next.
Such things are often used in companies and work well. It is not expensive for the company.
The first thing that no one can do without when making a forecast is the sales volume, sales history, and sales statistics for the previous years. The more detailed your statistics, the more correct and detailed your forecast will be.
Sales should be in different sections, in the section of the assortment, in the section of customers, in the section of regions, how it is conducted, all the sections need to be done. Because the presence of this information allows you to analyze which channel works best, in which region there is more sales, which customer works at full return, and which does not.
Therefore, such statistics should be conducted in the company. It is now conducted in 98% of companies, so you take it safely, as much as possible, and start analyzing.
The next source is also necessary. This is, of course, the customer base. The lists of customers, the lists of customers can be grouped in completely different ways. Each company adopts its own algorithm for dividing customers.
They can be divided by turnover, they can be divided territorially, they can be divided by level. For example, a client who is given the right to exclusive sales, just a distributor, just an opt-in, and so on. They can be divided by sales channels. For example, an opt-in client, a retail, a network retail, and so on.
That is, this is how the division can be carried out. In addition to the fact that you need a list of customers, of course, with their sales volumes, because they simply will not give you anything in the list, of course, with their sales volumes, with their history, when they started working, what was the growth dynamics, how much volume they have today.
You also need a customer passport. What is it for? The customer passport is all the information about the client that the company collects. And the list is large enough. Each company adopts its own list, of course, but all the basic elements should be there.
The size of the company, the number of employees, the number of clients of this company, the coverage of the territory, the volume of sales, the key assortment that this company buys, the key people who make decisions on the purchase of a particular product, and so on.
This list can be continued for a long time. Each company, as I said, makes decisions on its own, but such a passport should be in any case. And it does not depend on whether you have a system of working with clients called CRM or you just work in the 1S system. It does not matter. The main thing is that such a system is implemented.
By the way, anyone can implement it. Some marketers do it, and it's not bad, it's good. They help commercial units to systematize information, which they often do not have enough time for. And sometimes, and most often, it is the merchants themselves, because this is their base, this is their bread, this is their information, and they must collect it.
The next point that we need is the business plan of these clients. We must know what they plan to do next. For example, some network with which we work. We must know that next year, for example, they plan to open 20 more stores in such regions or cities. Why? Because it affects our plans. We have an agreement with them, we will provide delivery, and, of course, without this information, we will not plan anything.
Therefore, the plans for the development of the client are most often collected by the sales manager or the commercial director, depending on who works with this client. And, of course, this information is also used in sales planning and forecasting.
Another point about clients is the statistics of claims. Many companies now introduce such statistics, collect claims of clients, analyze, and, of course, solve all the questions that clients ask. What does it help to do? It also helps to optimize the assortment of each company, to understand which product is sold well and which is not very well, where service service is possible, and where not.
And taking into account this, it is also possible to plan and forecast sales for each client.
Another important point is accounting for costs. Unfortunately, not all companies do this. Companies that have a management accounting system have the opportunity to calculate and plan costs.
Because you need to understand what you spend on the client, what costs you bear in terms of time, finances, and basic resources. Without this, we cannot understand whether it is profitable for us to work with this client or not.
And most companies simply assess the average temperature in the hospital, that is, they look at the average costs and the so-called boiler method of calculation is carried out. In fact, this greatly reduces the quality of working with clients, allows many clients that are important to us to make the biggest profit, to leave, and, in fact, does not give us the opportunity to manage this situation.
And this has a very negative effect on turnover, because it takes a lot of time to acquire a new client and make him go up in turnover. Sometimes it takes more than a year.
What other sources of internal information can be used? The first point is the sales manager's attestation. This attestation is held once a quarter, it is evaluated how people work, how they grew up, what they do, in order to take into account the motivation system, the system of maintaining employees.
On such attestations, a lot of information about competitors and their actions comes out. And, in fact, in comparison with competitors, as our clients see our company on the market.
Therefore, the sales manager has a very large layer of information, and it is a sin not to use it. Therefore, I recommend you to create such a system of information collection, so that everything that can be accumulated in the database, collect this information, trying not to spend additional funds of the company.
Another point that I did not mention is the calculation of missed sales. Not all companies do this. What is it? You can calculate how much sales could be and how much did not take place, and, most importantly, for what reason.
The reason can be understood when you do statistics and analysis. The client left. Why? For example, he was not given a small discount, 1%. Well, let's go to the principle. The client left, there is no sale. Or there was no assortment, and the client said, I will buy either everything, or a full set, or I will not buy anything. Whose problem is this?
Of course, our problems are the problems of our company. Because we had to take into account that this product was constantly available, or available at this very moment. Because, in fact, we again did not get the profit. Such statistics of the missed profit and missed sales allows you to plan your next actions in more detail and the next planned period.
Well, colleagues, let's see what we need to consider. Even if we have collected the maximum information, what should we pay attention to so that the information is necessary, useful and, in fact, helps to make management decisions.
The first thing I would like to draw your attention to is the criteria for the usefulness of the data. That is, what data will give us the most accurate result. First, the data must be reliable. And here is the following recommendation. Do not take sales data earlier than 2000. Why? Because the market there was spontaneous. There were crises, then one, then the second, then the third.
These data, in fact, earlier than 2000, will simply reduce the probability of a more accurate calculation of your sales forecast. Therefore, the recommendation is exactly this.
The next point. The data must be important. What is it? Significant. In fact, you can collect a lot of information, but it will not have anything to do with forecasting. Some data that will be small will not affect the management decisions.
Therefore, before forecasting, you need to make a list of data that you need and work only according to this list so that the data is really realistic, clear, clear and, most importantly, applied in practice.
And one more important point for collecting data. The information that is collected should not be abstract or, you know, we started planning, let's collect the information. The information should be collected systematically, constantly, analyzed. Only then does it give its results, only then does it reduce the probability of error.
Because you look at it constantly, see some inaccuracies, you can take them into account when forecasting. What other things should be taken into account? It is necessary to take into account the unusual sales that occur in every company and, in fact, in every market, and they reduce the accuracy of the forecast. It is them that you need to simply remove from the forecast so that they do not spoil your picture.
What are these things, what are the subtleties? Well, the first point is some small sales, well, not typically small for your company's turnover. Why should they be removed? There could be different reasons for the reduction of these sales. For example, you had a shortage of products, the supplier did not put it, or there were some problems at the customs, they could not take your product out of the customs in time. Naturally, this does not affect the behavior of the buyer and the situation on the market.
If another company sold it, then such things should, of course, be immediately removed from the forecast.
What else? There may also be a delayed demand. An example of a delayed demand. Well, for example, in the real estate market this summer, there was a delayed demand. That is, there were offers, people had money, but everyone was waiting for the prices to drop and, in fact, they did not buy real estate, although there were offers, there was demand, and so on.
But this is not a typical situation for the market, so such a situation should also be removed from the forecast so that it does not spoil your data for the future.
The next point is, on the contrary, sales jumps. We need to analyze all the jumps and see if they are random or permanent. If they are random, then we just remove this figure from the forecast.
When can a random sales jump occur? For example, the influence of external factors, the influence of legislation or the influence of politics. For example, there was a terrorist attack and a sharp rise of the market to the security system.
This is a random jump that will not happen again, so it should be removed from the forecast. If this is a permanent jump, for example, before the New Year's sales, we all know that before the New Year, people practically just throw money away.
This is a practice. Therefore, of course, these jumps that are permanent should be taken into account as a seasonal factor. These jumps cannot be removed from the forecast.
The next point is about some random events that happened in your company. For example, you did a re-branding of a product, changed the appearance of the product, made a completely different appearance, packaging, and maybe the shape itself changed.
And you need to sell everything that has accumulated in the warehouse in order to launch a new product right away. So, the increase in sales at this point is also not taken into account in the statistics, because it was with certain factors. Such factors are not permanent. Therefore, we remove such data from the forecast.
Before we move on to the main algorithm, let's see what forecasting methods exist in general. In practice, there are a lot of forecasting methods, there are more than 150 of them, and they are divided into different types. We will briefly consider these types and see which type is best to use.
The first type of forecasting or method is an analog method. What is this method? When we can analyze the development of a market like this. For example, our product has passed to another stage of the life cycle. From the growth stage, it has passed to maturity stage. And, of course, the dynamics have decreased.
But we don't know for sure what the market will change, whether there will be a drop or, on the contrary, a growth in demand. Therefore, here we can apply just such an analog method. Forecast in an analogy with a similar product.
I will give an example. Now the motorcycle market is developing very actively. And it is not developing due to domestic manufacturers, but due to foreign companies that bring various scooters, mopeds, quad bikes to our market. And the market is growing very actively, and now it is very attractive for our companies.
But what I want to say is how to forecast its development. And its development can be forecast very well in an analogy with the car market. Today, the motorcycle market is at a level where the car market was 7 years ago.
When people chose to buy a new car of the Russian brand or a car of a foreign car, but a used car. And the cost was approximately the same. Today, the situation is similar on the motorcycle market.
But we see how the car market is developing. Time has passed, people have money, and now most people buy not used cars, but new ones. Because their cost has dropped significantly, and the population's payability has increased.
In an analogy, we can see what the motorcycle market is waiting for in 5-7 years. Or we can look at the development of the motorcycle market in the West, with what dynamics it has developed there. But there, the situation is less typical for Russia, because there are some features.
Therefore, it is better to look at our market, but similar models. And in an analogy, we can build a forecast of our product, which we produce or sell.
The next method is a normative method. It is mathematical, it implies calculation by the formula. We calculate how much a product should consume. For example, each family should eat a loaf of bread per day.
We calculate the number of families, how much bread is needed, and so on. We get a normative forecast. This is the simplest mathematical calculation. We calculate how much is imported from abroad, how much is exported, and so on.
And the volume of the market remains. This is not how you can calculate every market. Why? Because not every market has consumption standards. For example, how to calculate the consumption standard of a tractor or a motorcycle?
It is almost impossible to calculate it by standards, because there are too many influencing factors. The normative method can only be used on a stable market for a given product. Whatever happens, people will buy bread. When the market is such that no matter what happens, people will still buy a product, the normative method is the most effective, simple and understandable.
You can use it. Such methods are often used on the medical equipment market, because it is clear how many clinics, how many stations, how many operations, how much equipment they buy. This forecast allows you to calculate more accurately how much equipment is needed for each medical field.
The next method is the expert assessment method. It is used most often on our market. Why? First, our market is not as old as in the West or in America, and we do not have such a large statistic to predict, for example, by trend models.
This method allows you to evaluate the market forecast using high-quality methods for a product, a product or a technology, and, in fact, with a very high probability, it allows you to do it.
There are at least two methods that are the most popular. The Delphi method, which I will tell you about in the course, and the reference group method.
The reference group method is when three reference groups are interviewed. The company's manager, the client, and the sales manager. These three reference groups give their forecast on the market. When we combine this forecast, we get a sales plan.
In fact, I want to say that managers often make forecasts a little higher, sales managers a little lower, and clients almost get to the point. Therefore, such a forecast is optimal in terms of expenses, understandable to everyone, and is often used without the use of such statistical or mathematical calculations.
And it helps to get very reliable data. As for the new product, no statistical methods will help you at all, so the Delphi method for the new product will be the most optimal.
The next method I would like to talk about is the method of making scenarios. In general, it came to us in Russia from Japan. The Japanese like to plan, they plan for 250 years ahead, and they are very thoughtful people, and so clear, technological.
They make a forecast, at least three types of forecasts, pessimistic, optimal, and optimistic. The pessimistic version is the most minimal version of the forecast that can take place, and in this version the company will not suffer a crash, it will remain in the market, it will remain at least at the level of profitability.
And such a forecast is often given only to the owner, because he must know that these are the main risks of the company. The second forecast, the optimal one, is often put in the sales plan to managers and is given as a task, as a goal of the company.
And the optimistic sales forecast is what the company can strive for due to the motivation system. That is, by introducing an additional motivation system for sales managers, we strive for an optimistic forecast. A very useful thing that can be applied regardless of how you consider your plan.
The next model I would like to mention is the extrapolation method, or the trend model, which is very popular with our companies. When we look at the previous statistics, we boldly draw a continuation with our hand and see how we will grow.
In fact, such methods also have a right to life, but I would like to say that they are good in conditions of a very well-understood, unchanging market. In Europe or America, such methods are popular because their market is understandable, they can also look at the analogies, that is, at how other markets developed, how.
And this is more or less predictable. Therefore, trend methods work well there. What do we have in terms of trend methods? I will give an example. We were at a conference on marketing in St. Petersburg in 2001.
There, a very respected professor in the field of economics developed a trend model that allowed to predict with an accuracy of 95%. That is, only 5% of the error. It was great. Because we were looking for a planning method, a forecasting method, we needed to understand whether we could use it.
When we approached this professor and asked about the restrictions, whether there were any restrictions on the application, he said, well, there is one, only one restriction. And it was so significant that we could not buy this program. The restriction was such that to predict with such accuracy, statistical data were necessary for 50 previous years per month.
You understand perfectly well that this is unrealistic in our market conditions. Our market has existed for 18 years, and the first half was absolutely natural. As we said, statistics cannot be applied at all.
Therefore, what can we talk about? When the number of data periods is reduced, then the accuracy is reduced along with it. And if we take data for the previous 7 years, then the probability of error reaches 40%.
At the same time, we realized that we could not use this model, unfortunately, for a long time. But probably in 50 years this method will be relevant. Another method I would like to talk about is the method of mathematical modeling or regression.
Mathematics is a great science, but it depends on what factors you apply to it, what you introduce, what changes this mathematical model will take into account. In fact, it is quite difficult to create such a mathematical model, because, as I said, the market is not yet completely stable, and we do not know what can happen tomorrow.
Maybe a new law will be introduced, or a new customs limit, or something else that will not allow us to develop in the way we would like. And, of course, the mathematical model cannot take all these factors into account.
Therefore, mathematics is just a formula. You get the quality data at the input, and you get the quality data at the output. If you are a supporter of mathematical models, then I recommend you to use the simplest ones, because they give the same result with the same level of error. But the more difficult the model is, the more difficult it is to understand what it takes into account and what it does not. The simpler it is, the more understandable the result it gives.
Well, colleagues, we have come to the main point, that is, to the algorithm for developing sales forecasts. And now we will look at what needs to be done, how it can be done, and what result it will bring you.
The first step we take in developing a sales forecast is to determine the list of key customers and, in fact, the list of key products on which we will make a forecast. Why do we start with this? Because our main task is to optimize the process, not to make our merchants suffer, but to make a high-quality forecast, and they will make a detailed forecast only for key customers.
Because, according to the Pareto rule, only 80% of the volume is given to 20% of key customers. We will calculate these 20% and see how it is done.
The next step will be the forecast of the market capacity. This is done by parallel marketers who consider all sources of information that we have discussed, collect all the information necessary for forecasting, and then take it into account in the forecast.
They also calculate the seasonality coefficient. This is already done according to the sales statistics and is looked at by each group of products, not by a single assortment, but by a group of products. The seasonality coefficient is looked at as a result of each month over the year.
The next step that will be necessary is to analyze the development of business and key customers. Here, of course, we will have to talk to key customers, assess what they plan next year in order to take this into account again as the next step in our forecast.
The next step is to have external data, internal statistics, and a plan for the development of key customers. We make a sales plan for key customers. This is the first summary part that we see.
The next step is to develop a sales plan for new customers and new products. These are completely different things. These are not the products that we have already worked on, these are not the customers we have dealt with. These are new products that we are introducing to the market for the first time.
Naturally, the probability of error there will be more serious, so we take these data into account completely separately. And the next step is to transfer all our figures to the Ansofa matrix and further clarify what the probability of error may be for each item.
Well, we have already looked at the sixth step, how many key customers we have, what volume of sales can be made. We talked to you, the rule of pareto is divided 80 by 20. Actually, we predicted 80% of the turnover, and the rest of the 20% we calculate in proportion.
When we have a final plan, we start detailing. Detailing in regions, in customers, in assortment, completely in sections, not only in months, if this is a plan for a year, taking into account the influence of seasonality coefficients. Thus, we get a detailed sales plan.
Well, we have a sales plan, but it will not be working if we do not control it, if we do not understand by what procedure we change these figures. After all, anything can happen in the market, and we must be flexible in this regard. Therefore, it is necessary to write down who has the right to make changes to the sales plan, how often and how it will happen.
Well, the last step is the approval of this plan, which we have already created, implemented. Approval can take place in different ways. At the board of directors, at the meeting, or just by signing, when the manager has already met and agreed with these figures.
In any case, these will be figures that will plan your work for the next planned year and will be the basis for the budget of the company and the calculation of the necessary resources for this plan to be implemented. Well, let's go step by step and see in more detail what can be done and how at each step of this algorithm.
Step 1. Of course, this is the budget analysis that we talked about. I did not say in vain that, of course, first of all, we allocate clients in order to optimize the work of sales managers, because we will have sales managers planning. Well, of course, it depends on the level of their training, a lot.
If the managers themselves are not qualified enough, then the head of the sales department or supervisor is engaged in this together with the commercial director or sales director. These are their direct functions, they know the clients well and, therefore, of course, they will work in this way.
But in order not to force them to plan sales for 500 clients or for 1000 clients, of course, we choose the key ones. And this is only 20% of clients who make 80% of the sales volume. Look, and if the assortment is 5000, are they really planning these sales for all 5000 positions? Of course not.
In the same way, we select a key assortment for our company, on which we will focus, and only according to it we make a forecast. If we made such a forecast, it gives us the opportunity to manage these key clients, manage the assortment that they buy and, in fact, choose the best way of managing. That is, you know, to be aware of all events, to understand what and how is done, this is very important.
And here the main goal is to optimize time, optimize resources for calculation. Let's look at the slide. The BC analysis algorithm is presented. And here you can see that we make a table where we evaluate the turnover of each client that he had in a year.
Then we calculate the share in turnover, if we take the entire turnover for 100%, and assign a rating. Actually, the first place is given to the one who has the largest share, and so on. And then we build a schedule on which we place all clients, but very interestingly, with an increasing result.
That is, we take the share of the first client, the one who takes the first place in the rating, and this client is number 2, 45.6% of his share in turnover. He is in the first place. The next column, which is drawn here, is already a total of the share of the first and second clients in the rating.
And so on, we add each client. In the very last column, we should get all the clients we calculated, that is, in 100% they should all fit. What do we do next? Next, we just cut off the area where we have clients within 80% of the turnover.
Just the same rule as for RETA. Within 80% of the turnover, we get only two clients, this is the first and second client. Next, we cut off 90%. We look who falls into the 90% area. This is our client at number 3. And actually, from 90% to 100% is group C.
And here we get two more clients, number 4 and 5. Of course, the example here is a little simplified. In the company, of course, more detailed calculations are obtained, but nevertheless, this is actually a 3-minute work if you have all the information in the database.
Therefore, it is very simple to do this, and most importantly, it is very useful. Group A is our key clients, and group B is the clients that either become key for us, that is, they are potential key clients, they also have a certain share in the turnover, or new ones that have not yet gained turnover, they can get here, of course.
Well, in group C, we do not pay special attention to the clients, we work as with all the standard methods. So, just for planning sales, we take only group A, because it is the key one. In fact, in the same algorithm, you do the analysis of the ABC on the assortment and select the top assortment. And then all this information goes to the sales managers.
This is how the forecast decomposition occurs, as shown on the slide. We divide by directions, for example, the company has two directions of activity, there can be 3, 5, 15, as many as you want, but each direction has its own clients, and each client has its own set of assortment positions that he acquires.
And this is how the table is filled out, which is presented to you on the slide, where the client is assigned, the assortment that he buys, and note the conditions, that is, a discount or a payment delay, or some additional, or there is a compensation for transport costs, what the work with the client implies, the terms of the contract are necessarily entered here.
Why? Because this, in any case, reduces our marginal profit. We must be very careful about this, so we write down all the conditions here. And, of course, the turnover in rubles per product.
And this is how we get a filled out table. I understand, it's easy to say, it's probably more difficult to do. In fact, such a forecast is given somewhere for 2-3 weeks by sales managers, so that they do it regularly, that is, not two days off, but a normal, regular job, which allows them to see, see the main thing, what is happening with their clients, and then more consciously plan further.
Well, this was the first step, and now the second step is the forecast of the market capacity. This step, of course, is made by marketers. If there are no marketers, then maybe the general director, together with the commercial one, that is, someone does it anyway, because we need to understand how the market is developing.
Here we are just within the framework of assortment groups, not within the framework of clients, but within the framework of assortment groups. We look at the dynamics of the development of each group, we look at the data on the sales statistics of the previous year, we look at how much was sold this year, which is ending, and analyze the dynamics, what is the increase or, on the contrary, the fall or stagnation in the market.
We need this information to understand what's next. This is, of course, a small piece of the trend, we look back to be able to predict ahead, but here the numbers are not just a continuation of the trend, but here we are collecting a lot of information.
All the information we have listed is the information of experts, the information of plant publications, additional sources, some research. Based on all this information, we put a figure that is at the very top, this is the dynamics forecast for the next year.
This figure is not just taken from the ceiling, it is data from a deep analysis. It is enough to put this figure here. I want to say that if you have such a statistic law in different sources, if the information in different sources does not exceed 10%, you can rely on this information as a managerial one.
If the difference is greater, then look for other figures, additional evidence, etc. Until you are sure that this information is the most accurate you can get.
Of course, there is no 100% accurate information on the market, there are forecasts, assumptions, etc., but these are the forecasts and assumptions of the players in the industry, so why not trust them?
The next step is the third step, when we, or the commercial unit, to be more precise, considers the forecast of the development of key clients. And here it is necessary to communicate with each client.
This is not just some data from the outside, although there may be data from the outside, for example, on some sites companies write their development plans, or the manager gave an interview to some magazine, and we also took data from there. This can be done, of course. Here the marketing department comes to the rescue when collecting external information.
But the key information is still taken from the clients, it is necessary to talk to each of them and understand what they really plan to do and what to expect. And here are examples, a table is filled. One client has a development of a client base of 15%, he wants to go in one direction, another has the opening of 5 trading points, and of course we also make our plans for this.
Therefore, the forecast of growth in the far right column is the result of negotiations with industry experts, with our key clients. In this case, they are experts in this area.
Well, we have come to the fourth step. The fourth step is calculation and coordination of the plan for key clients, taking into account the factor of their development and the dynamics of the market. That is, we take into account both factors. What do we write down?
We look at the client's detail, the range they sell, the turnover, their development plans, then the dynamics they plan to grow according to their opinion. Then we enter the dynamics of the market, which will also grow regardless of whether the client has an additional 5 points, whether he will increase his base by 15%, or not. The market will still grow.
Therefore, two data indicators are added up. They do not depend on each other, they are added up, and, of course, here the sales plan is calculated in a simple mathematical way. This is the far right column, where we simply add up the percentage of the market growth that is obtained as a result of the information obtained.
Well, we have calculated the numbers, and now I propose to apply one clarifying tool. In fact, this tool is very useful, because it will allow you not to get lost in what clients we can accurately and clearly predict with a minimal error, but what we still need to look at the forecast, because it can be unrealistic and overestimate our numbers, and then, in fact, demotivate as a result of our managers.
And not to get what we wanted as a result.
The Ansofa matrix is a strategic management tool, and you have already familiarized yourself with it. And I want to offer you, look at it and try to apply it in practice, namely to forecast sales. It works very well in this case.
What do we do? You see here a table on the slide, the first table, which is divided in accordance with the Ansofa matrix. There is an old market, an old product, a new market, a new product. That is, the old market, the one we are already working on, that is, these are existing clients.
The new market is a new client with whom we have not yet worked. We plan, that is, either this is a potential one, or we have just started working with them. Further. The existing product is the assortment with which we work constantly, and the new product is actually the assortment that can be introduced.
Here, at the intersection of each of the two indicators, naturally, a strategy arises. We apply the matrix as follows. We enter the numbers into this matrix. Vertically, we will have an assortment in columns, and horizontally, clients. That is, each will have its own number.
Moreover, if you plan to have an existing product with existing clients, it will, of course, fall at the intersection of the old product and the old market. If you plan to introduce a new assortment with the same clients, then you plan to have a new product at the intersection of the old market.
If you have an existing product, but you have entered a new region or a new industry with a new client, then you, of course, put the data in the cells at the intersection of the new market and the old product.
If you have new clients and a new product, then your cell at the intersection of the new market and the new product, and then you put your predicted sales in each cell. Or the manager does it by sales. He puts all these numbers there.
The work is, of course, detailed, and here, probably, the help of a marketer is needed. And it would be great if this happens. If they work in tandem, then, in general, it will turn out to be a more interesting situation, a thought-out, analyzed situation.
So, what's next? And then we add up all the numbers that we got in each cell. And at the bottom of the slide you have the following table. This is the accuracy of the prediction according to the ANSOFA scheme. And you see that each number can be multiplied by the probability of this prediction being realized.
Very interesting numbers. If the old market, the old product, then the forecast can be achieved by 90-100%, and you can take this into account, depending on how long your managers have been working. If they have experience, clients, and they know them very well, you can leave 100%. If there are concerns that it is not planned so well, the manager may not be qualified enough, this also happens often, put a percent less, put 90%.
The next point. If you have an old product, but a new client, then the accuracy of the forecast is 40-50%. The more qualified the manager, the more probability we leave. So, we multiply the number that we got there, for example, 10,000, by 50%. That is, we subtract half and leave 5 instead of 10 in this square.
What's next? Next, new products on the existing market. That is, we offer new products to the existing client. The accuracy of the forecast is 60-70%. And in the same way, if we got 10,000, we multiply by 70% and get only 7,000 in this cell.
And, in fact, new products in the new market. I want to say that we, of course, plan, predict, draw monologues, but still, by and large, it's a casino game. Therefore, of course, the accuracy of the forecast here is the lowest. And don't be afraid to make a mistake here, don't be afraid to reduce the numbers.
Let your forecast be slightly underestimated, but at least you won't make such a big mistake, because this is a square in which the biggest mistakes happen most often. And, in fact, the probability of the forecast is 10-20%. Depending on the qualifications and experience of the managers, you choose what you want to take, 10 or 20%, and, in fact, multiply this number.
As a result, you get an accurate sales forecast for the Ansoff matrix. And this number will already be your plan. Of course, if it turns out to be very small, and this does not correspond to the request or the task of the owner, then go back a few steps back and start analyzing the key clients again.
Start thinking about what and how you can increase or decrease somewhere, don't take something into account, think about where else you can change the forecast. If we get an inadequate number, we go back to step number 2 and start the process again.
Well, the next step, when we already have the volume, is, if you remember, according to the ABC analysis, these are those 20% of clients who make 80% of the sales volume. So, how can we see the rest of the 20% of the turnover? It's very easy to make a proportion.
There are many small clients left. We will not waste time calculating each of them. This is not reasonable. Someone will come, someone will stay, someone will change their conditions. It can be different. Therefore, we will just make a proportion. The proportion is such that we calculated 80% of the turnover, we take another 20% and get the total sales figure.
The next step is detailing. The total figure does not tell us anything, except for the goals that the company sets for itself. Detailing allows us to plan the work of each manager. What do we do here? Detailing is done as follows. We take the sales channel, it can be an opt, a retail, corporate clients.
Next, we take the region separately, because, look, each region can have its own dynamics. Marketologists take this into account and give the dynamics of development in directions, taking into account the regions. Therefore, it is necessary to divide regions.
The regional division will not give an optimal result. You choose how to classify this forecast. The client is chosen, the first, second, third, and so on. And for each client, a sales plan is made in this section.
Now this annual plan is detailed monthly, taking into account the seasonality coefficients. Seasonality coefficients, for example, are given at the bottom of the slide on the third table. And you can see, it is done very easily, according to statistics, the total sales volume is taken per year.
Then the average is calculated, and the coefficients are set relative to this average. For example, in January, 0.7 is sold from the average, and so on. And such seasonality coefficients, I want to say, should be individual for each group of goods.
If you have several groups of goods, if there is a single product, then there are no questions, and one table is suitable for all questions. And, taking into account the seasonality coefficients, taking into account the seasonal jumps or falls, we detail the total figure, which we got per month, per group of goods.
As a result, you get a clear plan for each client, for each month, for each assortment, for each sales channel. And you know why this figure turned out. Where did it come from? And it is very easy to manage these sales.
What should be done next?
It is very important to make a strategic forecast for 3 to 3.5 years. I want to say that if you introduce new products, and now most companies do it, a strategic forecast is extremely important, because most often in a year the product is not paid for.
And your owner simply will not spend money without understanding what the result will be. That is why a strategic forecast for at least 3 years is the most relevant for today. Even our government has already signed a budget for 3 years. This is a sign.
Therefore, I recommend you to make such forecasts. Of course, no one says that they will come true 100%, but it is still a plan, you know, according to which you go and you can track deviations and take some actions. If you have not planned anything, then you will not take any actions, or they will be chaotic.
Well, I think that a year plan is made by 100% of companies. Therefore, the plan that we discussed in the previous slide is a year plan, how it can be detailed. Therefore, such a system is almost everywhere in companies.
Next point. A quarterly, monthly or semi-annual planning. Here I want to give one recommendation. In my experience, it turned out that in addition to the annual planning, the semi-annual also gives very good results, and the quarterly one. It allows you to understand how much the forecast is broken down and whether it needs to be corrected.
And during the annual planning, we introduced such a system. The total figure per year, provided that there are no strong force majeure factors, should not change. But within this year, our company, our client, can change some of its forecasts.
For example, it turned out that they did not calculate, bought more than necessary, and then they cannot sell. Why should the company bear additional warehouse costs? They have the right to correct their sales plan in three months, in a quarter, and say, guys, we wanted to take 100,000 products for the next quarter, but we will probably take only 80,000, because we have such circumstances.
But in the next year we will correct our figures. When it is done in three months, it can be taken into account, because we have not yet produced or bought the product, at least we will not bear these warehouse costs. Imagine if they say this a week before the purchase. Then we can hardly afford it, because then we will lose our profitability.
And when you set such rules, the client understands that he can think in advance, and right before the purchase he is no longer able to change his plans. This also makes the client think, analyze the situation and prevent such things that actually give additional costs and help to plan your business and his too.
The next point is to include suppliers and customers in the forecasting system. We have already talked about customers, but suppliers are also an important point. Why? Because if you buy a certain amount of components or finished products, the larger the batch, the lower the cost of production.
And here we must calculate such an optimal batch in order to save some of our resources, including financial, logistical and any. And on the other hand, not to allow the situation called out of stock. This is a product when there are no necessary positions in the warehouse.
This leads to a decrease in profit and turnover. Therefore, it is advisable to include suppliers in the planning system, especially large ones, depending on the situation. And so you can achieve better delivery conditions.
The next point is to monitor and control your figures. This is a constant control. In different companies, someone analyzes sales once a month, someone does it once every 10 days.
The more quickly your product is wrapped, the more often you need to analyze sales. Because when you do it according to the results of a planned period, for example, a month or a quarter, you can't change anything, you can only change future events.
And when you carry out operational control once every 10 days or once every 2 weeks, you have some tools that you can use to correct the sales plan, to undertake something, to launch some additional incentive program, to give some advertising, to provide some conditions to the supplier, and so on.
You can play with prices, there are many options. But the main thing is that you can do it in the process without getting a negative result. This is the main meaning of the control system in all this.
I would like to say separately what such a control system or forecasting system gives us. The first is that the managers themselves participate in the composition of the plan. No one imposes it on them from above, they clearly analyze and understand the main thing, how they can implement this plan.
That is, the motivation of your managers is greatly increased. The second point is that you increase their qualification. Not every manager, you must agree, participates in the planning system and can do it competently. And a manager who knows how to do it, knows how to plan his relations with clients. And this is very important. Because knowing how to plan, we can manage. Without planning, we do not manage anything, we obey the circumstances that exist.
I would like to say that not only material motivation, but also moral, plays a role here. Because there is simply a belief that plans can be implemented, that these are some unreachable quantities. And this is very important.
And not only that, but the knowledge of the client is also increasing, relations with the client are improving. Because in this case, the client is not just imposed, but consulted, discussed. And this makes your relationship with the client partner.
I would like to say a few words about the procedure for adjusting the plan and what needs to be prescribed. Each company has its own procedure, so the most important thing is to answer the questions that exist. First, who implements the adjustment of the plan? Who has the right to do this? Second, when and how often? Third, based on what information? And who approves the changes in this plan?
These points are very important. And here a short instruction is prescribed, literally, who is responsible for what process, and so that everyone clearly understands and knows this. And then the implementation takes place.
Step 10 is approval. I did not consider it separately. Each company approves in different ways. Somewhere the board of directors approves the sales plan, somewhere the general director just signs it. Sometimes it is given to the owner to study, to calculate the budget, and then to the approval.
Each procedure has its own procedure. Therefore, the most important thing is that the plan must be signed, approved and accepted for use. We have a detailed plan for clients, so each manager has a clear work plan, what he should do, how and on what assortment.
But it often happens that the plan that is designed, made, for some reason does not suit the management, because the managers are ambitious and they always want to somehow increase the figure that is obtained. Here on the slide there is a method of finding opportunities for sales growth.
This is to look again, but if suddenly the plan does not suit, the figure does not suit, let's see what can we do to improve our sales. This method was developed by Jean-Jacques Lambin and offers it in his book Management focused on the market.
The method is very simple, logical steps that make everyone who participates in the sales forecast in the company think. How else can you increase your sales? Let's look at the very beginning.
The first step is to put things in order in the company, or to protect the position. What should be done here? Of course, you need to look at whether the sales department is adequate for the tasks that are set. Maybe there are not enough managers, maybe they do not have the qualifications that are necessary for the sale of some complex product.
Maybe it is necessary to train people so that they can communicate competently and well. Therefore, here, of course, you need to first look at whether everything is in order in the company, whether the business processes are working, whether the tasks are clearly set, whether people have been given a tool for implementation, a program of motivation, advertising opportunities, loyalty programs for clients, and so on.
There are a lot of tools, you can manage the price, so here the most important thing is to understand whether we have done everything so that the company works stably and well.
If everything is in order, or you have already put things in order, and, of course, the sales volume has increased, in my practice, only due to this point, there was an increase of 42% of the turnover.
When they simply put things in order, gave people the right instructions, taught them to work, gave tasks that were clear and clear, 42% increase in turnover in an almost not very actively growing market.
Well, if we have protected our position, what do we do next? We look at whether we can compete with competitors, because they choose us as part of the clients.
But there is a certain subtlety, if your company is large, serious, you can afford it. If you work in a medium-sized business or a small one, then do not risk touching your competitors, because they can simply crush you in return.
Most often, there is a very large outflow of funds, financial resources and personnel resources for competing. Therefore, the most important thing is to comply with such conditions, compliance with parity on the market.
My favorite saying about competitors is like that of the dead, either good or nothing, it is better not to touch. If you have the opportunity to fight, fight.
The next point to work on is to increase or stimulate the use, make people use your product more often, buy it more often, consume it more often, anything.
There are many examples of this on the market, when a fashion is created for a particular product, a particular product, a particular product, when we are constantly forced to change mobile phones, which do not stop ringing, they just add functions that have nothing to do with the phone itself, but nevertheless everything is being updated.
And we are forced to chase this fashion, because we live in a constantly changing world, this is normal. Think about it, can you apply some tool to your product that would make you buy it more often, consume it more often, use it more often, and this will also give a certain increase.
The next point I would like to talk about is, of course, the expansion of the sales geography. For example, you have a certain customer base, certain regions where you sell, or maybe you want to go to another country.
We have, for example, many neighboring countries, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, which are very similar to us, and we can easily work with our products there. Why not? Or maybe you have more ambitious plans.
So think about it, due to the fact that you will go to another geographical market, you will naturally increase sales. And the last point, the addition of a range of products. Maybe you should introduce some new product that is super popular on the market, but is not yet in your range. If you introduce it, you will also increase your sales. These are the main opportunities that will allow you to increase your sales.
Well, using the technique I just told you about, you can model your sales volume, that is, understand what can be another increase. The diagram clearly shows what the company is increasing in sales.
Due to the increase in marketing activity, due to the release to new regions, due to the addition of a new product, and due to the growth of the market itself. Here is a clear detailed plan, or the detailing of this plan allows both owners and managers to understand what we are doing with you, the figure on which we are tasked.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words about what will change in the planning system if you apply this proposed methodology. The first is, of course, the introduction of individual planning for key clients. As I said, this allows them to manage, not just go with the flow, but to manage the situation. This is the most important thing, because key clients, as we remember, give 80% turnover. This is the most important thing for the stability of the company.
The next point is the accounting of the growth of key client businesses. Maybe we didn't take this into account, didn't ask. Well, they may grow, or maybe they don't grow. Or in fact, we have already determined that either additional deliveries are needed, or something else, or an additional assortment, which also caused chaos in the company's work.
Therefore, when we know the plans for the growth of key clients, for the growth of their business, it is no longer chaos for us, but a planned, clear work. The next important point is the alignment of planning from above and below. Below are the sales managers, above are the managers and the marketing department. Why from above? Because it gives a general market situation.
This is the only reason why when these plans meet, the truth is hidden. Because sales managers often lower the plans, and managers often increase them, because they do not know the features of working with a client.
The next point is the attraction of managers to the development of sales plans. Often this is not done in companies, but if you attract them, you get many advantages. As I said, their training, management of clients, understanding of the process, motivation, all this plays a very good role in the result.
And, in fact, an effective motivation system that allows you not only to fulfill the plan you have set, but also to be progressive, that is, when you do more than 100%, for example, the manager is motivated in a progressive attitude, naturally, this gives the manager the incentive not only to stay within these limits, but to go higher and increases your profitability of the business, your turnover and your stability.
The question arises, maybe you don't need to change anything, maybe you should leave everything as it is, live, work, even develop. But the market situation often changes, and the forecasting system cannot be introduced in one year and get a 100% guarantee of what you have.
The forecasting system is a system because the result is clear over time. The earlier you do it, the faster you will bypass your competitors.
Therefore, the forecasting system changes to take into account some factors. For example, planning from below will never give the desired result for the managers. Planning from above does not take into account the specificities of the clients.
And another important point is that planned work will help you to optimally determine the necessary resources for achieving this plan. As we said at the very beginning, these are people, money, technical capabilities, warehouse areas, etc.
That is, you will have a clear and understandable work of planning. Therefore, we get the result we were striving for. The setting of clear tasks, the clear work of the logistics system, the supply system, the clear work of the commercial service, the clear work of the marketing department, which provides support for sales in terms of incentives, advertising, optimization of all these costs,
and the achievement of the result we planned at the beginning. As a conclusion, I would like to make some objections to the managers of the company or business participants. Why don't you want to make a system? Why is it probably not necessary yet? And try to refute them.
The first objection is that we do not need sales forecasting. We have a clear market, clients have been working with us for a long time, the main ones, new ones appear rarely, and we live well without a forecasting system.
What I want to say here is that the market in Russia is not very competitive yet, but day by day the competition is growing, new companies appear, new directions in business that will soon bite off pieces from the company. Therefore, if we want the stability of the business, if we want a clear tomorrow, then planning is necessary.
What will planning give us? First, of course, it will provide access to client information. Second, it will reduce costs for logistics, for warehouse costs. Further, it will correctly distribute resources, absolutely.
And most importantly, it will allow us to predict both positive and negative moments in advance. Because positive moments are good, we all perceive them well, we are happy about them. And negative moments, if we at least predict that they can happen, we will have the opportunity to take some actions to reduce their influence on the business of the company.
The next objection I would like to make is that many companies, especially from the market of services, say that they cannot predict our situation, we do not know what client will come tomorrow, how we will work with him, what he will do for us. But this is all because the market is not stable enough. And the more unstable the market, the less opportunities for forecasting.
But the market is stabilizing. And we say that year by year it becomes more clear and transparent. The sooner we start forecasting, the sooner we will see which factors affect our activity the most. And that is why we will have the opportunity to clearly understand the situation.
I want to give you an example. The company I worked with was a printing company that provided printing services. And it printed booklets, self-adhesive labels, and so on. All services provided by any printing company.
And when we talked to the owner, he had the main objection that in our case we cannot predict, we do not know how many products will be ordered tomorrow, how many of this, what catalogs will be printed. But by introducing such a planning system, this company received the result even in the first year.
The owner began to clearly understand. Also, clients were divided according to the ABC analysis. According to the key, the planning was very serious and detailed. And according to the rest of the clients, of course, everything was calculated in proportion.
But the management of key clients allowed him to clearly plan his business. And thanks to this, he was able to calculate his expenses, his resources, and bring additional resources for another, for a new direction, on which he is now one of the Russian leaders. Therefore, plan and predict, regardless of what area you work in.
The next point. Forecasts can only be rainbow. We predict and we always grow. In fact, it does not always happen. And you have to take this seriously. If the forecast does not increase our sales, then it is a bad forecast. The managers say, nothing like that. You need to understand why it is so. And understand if we can influence these factors to increase the forecast.
We got a picture of the market and have not yet influenced it. And we can influence suppliers, clients, and buyers. We have the cards in our hands. If the forecast is negative, it does not mean that it is bad. It means that you need to think about how to make it different.
And one more important point. Or one very important objection. When they say that the forecasting system should work from the first year and should give accuracy of about 100%. And if it does not, then it does not work.
In fact, many companies are burned out. Having made such a system once and not getting the accuracy they wanted, they quit. In fact, the situation is very serious. And I want to say in practice that forecasting gives accuracy of 90-95% only for about the third year of planning.
Why? Because when we plan for the first time, we can not count and do not even know what factors can influence us. And most often the forecast of the first year is more optimistic, more rainbow than the situation on the market.
The second year is very careful, because the first time they got burned out and if they began to plan further, continued, found courage in themselves, then the indicators are usually lowered. But in these two years, the company clearly understands how and what needs to be taken into account, how to plan.
And this is the stability of the business. Therefore, if you have already taken to make a system, do not throw it halfway, but try to continue and get the result. The result will be accurate.
And now, when you are armed with this technique, you can start using it in your company or recommend it for use. And I want to say that the process itself is not a guarantee that something will happen.
Of course, the company must make clear efforts to achieve the goals set in advance. Good luck in your business and good luck. All the best, goodbye.